The health and Other Service Personnel Trade Union of South Africa (Hospersa) has claimed a go-slow at mortuaries is leaving grieving Gauteng families unable to claim their relatives bodies. Hospersa said last week that it was concerned by reports of services being disrupted by an ongoing labour dispute. The union is calling on government to fast-track its intervention by ensuring these officers receive the compensation they deserve, said Hospersa collective bargaining spokesperson Suzan Ntlatleng.According to the union s reports, 11 mortuaries in Gauteng are on a go-slow over the reinstatement of a danger allowance for forensic pathology officers (FPOs). The allowance was stopped in 2006 when the officers were transferred from the SAPS to the Department of Health, with the dispute continuing for more than a decade. According to Ntlatleng, the worst-hit mortuary was in Diepkloof, where numerous families were unable to claim their relatives remains on Thursday. It is devastating that bereaved families are made to endure even more suffering after the loss of a loved one, said Ntlatleng. Trade unions have tabled the issue of danger allowance at the public health and social development sectoral bargaining council and the government has requested more time to respond to the proposed agreement. We urge our members not to lose sight of the other issues that have also been tabled concerning their conditions of service, she said.She said at the bargaining council Hospersa demanded government address the misappropriation of FPOs regarding the additional duties they perform over and above their scope of work. Such duties include dissection, removal of organs, stitching of bodies and the preparation of organs for investigation. Hospersa stressed the fact these processes should be done by trained forensic pathologists and the FPOs should be compensated and receive recognised training, she said. The role these officers play in society is very important and should be acknowledged, said Ntlatleng. We have proposed to government that the officers should be granted Recognition for Prior Learning and demanded a special danger allowance as well as back-pay. Ntlatleng told the Saturday Star the Department of Health had promised a response at the next bargaining council on June 15. @ShaineGermanerSaturday Star