“Comrades cannot be told that they can appeal a case. If you look at the judgment, there are many loopholes. “If the PEC doesn’t appeal, who will do it? They are nullified but they must stand up to what they believe they should do to protect the integrity of the ANC,” Mbalula said on Friday,during his visit at the notorious Glebelands hostel. Meanwhile, a meeting between the ANC top brass and the party’s KZN leaders was expected to take place at party headquarters, Luthuli House. Earlier this week, a High Court judgment declared the province’s 2015 elective conference unlawful. Provincial structures vowed to appeal the ruling. A war of words between the mother body and  the now defunct provincial leadership  erupted over whether or not to appeal the decision. Mbalula criticised the four members who took the party to court, saying the ANC has resolved that members cannot take the organisation to court. “Even if we may be factional and we know that there are conferences coming up but we should not do things that are un-organisational because that will catch up with us. "We can’t say because of our factional interests, we don’t deal with issues on the basis of principle,” he explained. Read: What next for #KZNANC camps? Mbalula said ANC secretary-general, Gwede Mantashe as the custodian of ANC policies and its principles, has got to give direction. “The PEC must be supported to act in the best interests of the ANC and ANC members and to protect the ANC constitution,” Mbalula added. He cautioned against supporting rebellion in the province, saying that it would set a bad precedent. “If the NEC members are going to split and support rebellion in the organisation instead of supporting legitimate structures, that is not an organisation, it’s a picnic. We can’t allow that, we must never allow anarchy to prevail,” Mbalula added. Political analyst Daniel Silke said the the repercussions of decisions that come out of Friday’s meeting will go beyond the province, which has the largest ANC support base countrywide. He said key considerations from the meeting should be what is best for the ANC and the province. “Time is of the essence, there is the elective conference in December, the matter has to be resolved adequately before that. “If delegates from KZN branches are not properly constituted it would seem unlikely that the elective conference goes ahead, especially given that this is the province with the most delegates,” he said. Silke said due to the volatile nature of the province, the kind of leadership vacuum that now exists would cause instability. Saturday Star