Fikile Mbalula took over as police minister recently. Like him or loathe him, he is a man of action and will certainly inject much needed new blood into the SAPS. Crime is high. Police morale is low. Resources are limited. These are just some of the many realities facing the SAPS. Mbalula’s predecessor was often labelled a dead duck. He did little to change the SAPS. No wonder excitement is already high in police ranks as Mbalula settles into his new role. We have depended on government for far too long to protect us. Yes, it’s government’s responsibility. But the time has come for us all to do our bit and create a safer South Africa. It’s time to reclaim our streets. The Marikana massacre and the death of Andries Tatane continue to haunt the SAPS. Inefficiency is widespread and lack of visible policing remains a problem. Days into office, Mbalula dropped the court appeal to have Berning Ntlemeza keep his job as Hawks boss. This was decisive action. Leadership problems have plagued the SAPS for years and even acting national commissioner, Lieutenant-General Kgomotso Phahlane, is embroiled in controversy. I’m certain Mbalula is going to sort out the mess. The police needs strong and stable leadership – and now. On-going in-fighting and the tit-for-tat nonsense must cease. Some have questioned whether Mbalula is the right man for the job. He is young. He is dynamic. He is energetic. The one thing he can do is mobilise and we have seen some of it since he moved into police HQ. During his reign as sport minister, Mbalula led scores of mobilisation campaigns and he created hype and excitement. Who will forget his famous “moer hulle” remark when we gave the Springboks a massive send-off to the Rugby World Cup? He visited Laudium outside Pretoria last week and heard of the drug problem. He mobilised and the next day saw the largest anti-crime operation in the area to date. He returned two days later and made an unannounced visit to the police station. This is what we need. We need action and we need it urgently. No part of our country is immune to crime and the SAPS needs to really work hard. Mbalula is going to keep them on their toes. Civil society must unite and contribute to making SA safer. Partnerships with law enforcement agencies at all levels are required. Community Police Forums (CPFs) must be effective. Some are. Others are simply useless. We need to ensure that they all up their game and take charge of their areas. The criminal justice system needs to be strengthened. The National Development Plan says we need “an efficient and effective” system. We have to bring the blueprint to life. Far too many criminals are granted bail. This matter needs to be addressed and we need professional detectives. Criminals are running amok and for as long as we don’t get the SAPS and our courts right, they will continue their terror. The law must come down hard on criminals. Mbalula is spot on when he says we must use technology in the fight against crime. I have endorsed the Namola Safety App which is an instant panic button. It is available free and the entire Gauteng will soon have GPS location. It was piloted in Tshwane and the Gauteng Community Safety Department will soon be launching it. Let’s find clever ways to fight crime. Let’s mobilise like never before. Let’s join hands and reclaim our streets. We have to also address the root causes of crime. Yes, some of it is poverty and unemployment. But, much of it is greed. Many of the criminals live in upmarket areas, dress flashy and drive fancy cars. For how long are we going to live in fear? Crime is going to kill South Africa if we don’t act now. House invasions, business robberies, cash-in-transit robberies, airport followings, gang violence, smash and grabs and other crimes are common. On average, about 50 people are murdered in South Africa every day. We have a national crisis. We have good cops and we have bad cops. Yes, some are rotten but the majority are committed. It’s time to also improve the salaries of our men and women in blue, especially the lower ranks. They risk their lives for us. We can sit back, continue to whine and point fingers. But we rather stand up, find solutions and do something. Together, we can make a difference. Let’s unite and declare #CrimeMustFall. Let’s not politicise the fight against crime. It affects all of us and let’s rather hold hands and work together. Now is the time.  * Abramjee is an anti-crime activist and social cohesion advocate. He is also chief ambassador for the Namola Safety App. ** The views expressed here are not necessarily those of Independent Media. Saturday Star 