Johannesburg Panjo the tiger is depressed. He s lost his appetite and pines for the house that once stood on the hill. A visiting French animal whisperer told his owner Rosa Fernandes this after communicating with the tiger. Fernandes immediately recognised the house Panjo was longing for.That house stood in the Jugomaro Predator Park in Groblersdal. This was where Panjo had an enclosure the size of a football field and he could lounge on the sofas in the lounge like a lap dog.But Panjo s home now is a small enclosure on a piece of land close to Krugersdorp.There are no swimming pools or night rooms. Next to him in other enclosures are tigers, lions, a jaguar, and two caracals. These are all rescues or from people who didn t want them anymore, explains Fernandes. Close by is the caravan and the tents where Rosa and her son Justin have lived for over a year.Here they have to heat their own water, and use an outside shower and toilet. We ve gone this far. It can t get any worse; there is no price too high for my cats, she says.But Fernandes doesn t need an animal whisperer to tell her her cat is depressed. He has lost 20kg and these days he just picks at his food.The last year has been hard on Panjo and the Fernandes family, who have lost almost everything. Panjo leapt to fame in 2010 when he escaped from the bakkie he was being transported in on the R25 road between Groblersdal and Bronkhorstspruit.This prompted a massive search that involved specialist trackers, helicopters, dogs and scores of following journalists.The tiger was on the run for several days before a dog trained to track big cats picked up his scent.Goosey, Rosa s husband, was able to coax the 17-month-old tiger into the back of his bakkie, and Panjo was taken back to Jugomaro.In November 2015 the Fernandes family made headlines again when they were evicted from their property in Groblersdal after financial problems. Fernandes remembers how the Red Ants dumped all of their belongings. We literally left with the clothes on our backs. There were protests on the road, preventing the liquidators from moving the animals. In an earlier attempt to move the animals, one of their tigers was injured when it was shot. The animal had apparently jumped on to a security guard. Then I climbed on to one of the trucks, and I told them where my cats are going, I am going, Fernandes recalls.Justin dug the 9mm slug out of the tiger s jaw. The Fernandes were later prevented from entering the property and a friend had to care for their animals.The tigers were the worst affected three died either during the move or in the months that followed. Alice died on the truck, Kujo died a day later, Everest after that, says Fernandes. Two wolves and a caracal also died in the move.There was to be more bad luck for the Fernandes family. While looking for a place to house his cats, Goosey ended up badly burnt when the ground he was walking on, near Springs, gave way. He ended up waist deep in a burning coal pit.It is believed he had fallen into coal seam that had caught alight. Goosey spent two months in ICU and lost a finger.To find a home for their cats, the Fernandes turned to Facebook. Eventually a landowner offered them a place to stay. They had five days to move their cats and build the enclosures to house them.Keeping 20 cats and a jackal is an expensive business. They go through 100kg of chicken a day and it costs about R11000 a week to feed the animals. It s basically seven years to get here, says Rosa. At least now we can talk about it without crying. Justin feeds the cats by hand. When asked if he is worried that one of his cats could attack him, he says he prefers to be killed by one of his animals than die at the hands of criminals on the streets of Joburg.Word has got around and visitors come to see the predators. There are tours during feeding time.But the menagerie is not going to be there that much longer. At the end of February the family s plan is to move to Vaalwater in Limpopo.The Fernandes have bought a 300ha lodge and are building enclosures for the animals now. We want to have swimming pools, and night rooms for the cats. It will be paradise, says Fernandes.With a more permanent place to stay and a room to roam, Fernandes hopes this will finally help lift Panjo s depression.Saturday Star