A group of 27 leading lion conservation and research organisations have written an open letter to the US Secretary of the Interior urging its wildlife authority to maintain its current ban on the import of captive-origin lion trophies.
Their letter is in response to an October letter from the SA Predators Association (Sapa) requesting the US Fish and Wildlife Services to lift its ban. In their letter to Ryan Zinke, the groups, which include the African Lion Working Group, Panthera and the Kwando Carnivore Project, argue Sapa’s letter is “fraught with inaccuracies, false statements, and a flawed viewpoint” and “shaped for the economic benefit of captive lion breeders. “The letter appears to associate the captive lion breeding industry with the wildlife ranching industry as a single entity. While there have been conservation benefits stemming from the expansion of South Africa’s wildlife ranching industry, captive breeding cannot claim any of the conservation successes that the industry has achieved.” This is because captive bred lions are kept in small intensively managed enclosures cleared of most of their indigenous vegetation. “While the letter’s author is correct in stating lion numbers have globally declined, this is not true for South Africa, where free ranging lions have recently been downlisted from ‘vulnerable’ to ‘least concern'. This is due to concerted conservation action and reintroductions, all of which have no connection with the captive lion industry.” Claims made by Sapa that captive bred lions are required for the reintroduction and species restoration “are not based on any scientific evidence”. In its letter, Sapa claims it adequately provides domestic and foreign traditional medicine markets with bones and “other parts” and the spike in poaching here has only taken place since the US ban. “This argument is flawed. Local legislation allows for lion breeders to sell products with permits. The ban has no influence on the exportation of bones to Asia, which has been ongoing since 2008. “Despite this being legal, we’re aware of no less than 22 captive lions having been poached for their parts this year alone. There has also been an increase in poaching of wild lions for their parts in Mozambique. It’s clear captive lion breeders are not preventing the poaching of wild lions, or may in fact be stimulating it.” There are many organisations that support sustainable use that do not support the industry. “Sapa states that hunting of captive bred lions presents direct conservation benefits to wild lions yet there is no published evidence to support this.” The Saturday Star