Why produce an album in vinyl and cassette format today? Simply because its “badass”, says electronic dance duo GoldFish.
The Cape Town-born dance duo, made up of Dominic Peters and David Poole, says it was an easy decision to release their newest studio album, Late Night People, in vinyl and cassette format in addition to CD format. “When Dave and I finished the last track on the album, we thought about how we’d like to listen to it. What would be the ideal experience? "Obviously digital is taken care of really well with streaming and MP3, but there are other ways to experience music which are more visceral,” Peters told the Saturday Star from the duo's current home in San Diego in the US. “We were always going to make a vinyl record, that was always a given. "We went with a bright orange one instead of the normal black with some limited addition touches to make it really special. Then we thought: ‘You know what would be really badass? How about we do a tape as well?’" Peters said memories of listening to cassettes during their childhood had inspired GoldFish to release their new album in vinyl and cassette formats too. “We had memories of listening to our favourite albums on tape when we were kids, so we thought there could be something really cool about borrowing your granddad’s old car, popping the cassette in and watching a sunset. "Or digging out that old boom box and giving it a whirl. We wanted to have a bit of fun with it and also create some collectors' items.” The album, which features songs such as Bad Luck And Trouble, Talk To Me and No One Has To Know, was recently released to the public. Peters said their fans had really taken to the new album and the vinyl and cassette format it comes in. “The response has been incredible,” he said. "We’re definitely going to sell out, so if you want a GoldFish collectors' item you better get on our website they make great Christmas presents, just saying!” With the response being so great, Peters said they were seriously considering coming out with vinyl and cassette formats for their future albums. “We have been inundated with requests for us to do our previous albums in the same formats, so let’s see. For now we are focusing on our new album.” Late Night People is GoldFish’s fifth studio album. Peters said they had spent the last two years on the album. “We worked on this album for two years and it was recorded all over the world. "San Diego, LA, Sao Paulo, Nicaragua, Cape Town, Atlanta, and of course we were editing and mixing it all the time on tour. "We are super happy with how it has come out and the response has been incredible from our fans. "There is something for everyone on this album and we have never forgotten our original sound and GoldFish DNA. "You can hear it all through the album but we have definitely evolved. We have honoured our early roots and also grown into the future.” Over the past few years, GoldFish have become one of the most renowned electronic dance duo groups in South Africa and the world. Peters attributes the group’s success to the hard work they have put in over the years. “It’s been a wild ride so far. Sometimes we have to pinch ourselves and think about everything that has happened. "It’s surreal that we live in San Diego now, and it’s really cool to stop and appreciate the journey to get to this point. I think our success has come from having a clear vision, working really hard, believing in our own sound. The rest has followed.” The Saturday Star