Mother City Council officials are “flabbergasted” by soccer club Cape Town City Football Club’s reaction to not having a stadium available for their league encounter against Maritzburg United.
On Thursday, CTCFC coach Benni McCarthy slammed the city’s officials for not having Cape Town Stadium available for their home league encounter against Maritzburg, which is set to be played on Tuesday. But City of Cape Town officials are furious, saying the football club was well aware that the stadium wouldn’t be available. In a scathing statement on the club’s social media platforms, McCarthy said football in Cape Town had been forced into exile and that the city’s officials had failed to plan and accommodate the club’s fixtures. “Football has been sold lies in Cape Town. When there is a private wedding, the stadiums are ready. When there’s a rugby competition, the stadiums are ready. When there’s a nitro circus car event, the stadiums are ready. "For football, Cape Town’s World Cup stadium - unavailable. Athlone Stadium - used by a thousand tenants and now a sand patch. Newlands - unavailable. Make an emergency plan at another venue across the entire Western Cape - um, sorry we didn’t think that far ahead. "But our fixtures are no secret! It’s about planning and willingness - and I cannot believe that our officials cannot see the immense commercial, cultural, and community impacts that CTCFC has in this city,” McCarthy said. The Cape Town Stadium, where CTCFC’s fixture against Maritzburg United was scheduled to take place, is unavailable due to ongoing preparations ahead of the Cape Town leg of the World Sevens Series on December 9 and 10. This means CTCFC will be forced to play their home game away at the Princess Magogo Stadium in Durban. Stuart Diamond, mayoral committee member for assets and facilities management for the City of Cape Town, said the football club had been made well aware of the unavailability of Cape Town Stadium some two weeks ago. “I am quite flabbergasted by this U-turn by CTCFC, which comes on the back of a CTCFC press article two weeks ago thanking and commending the city officials and me personally for our support and willingness to go the extra mile.” He said the game between Cape Town City and Maritzburg United had not even been scheduled to be played at Cape Town Stadium, but rather at Athlone Stadium. “While it is regrettable that Cape Town cannot, through sheer demand, host every premier sporting event at the Cape Town Stadium, and we note CTCFC’s concerns, we feel bound to point out that the game was scheduled to be played at the Athlone Stadium." Diamond added that every effort had been made over the past weeks and days toimprove the pitch there in the face of the severe drought in Cape Town. “Our communications with Safa (SA Football Association), the PSL and Ajax, Cape Town’s other premier soccer team, allowed Ajax to host the match last week, with the match commissioner’s approval. "CTCFC subsequently asked if we would engage with Saru (SA Rugby Union) to ask them to make an exception regarding Cape Town Stadium, and in addition the availability of Newlands Stadium. "We did; the answer was negative on both fronts. The Sevens is an international event scheduled a year in advance that requires comprehensive set-up and, most importantly, we hand the venue over to Saru and guarantee pitch condition, and Newlands has already started its remedial work and is not playable. "CTCFC then requested that we assist them with a letter to the PSL asking for the game to be played away. We obliged and did not turn them away. We reiterate that they asked for our support to get permission to play elsewhere." Diamond added that the club was also allowed access to Cape Town Stadium to have multiple training sessions in preparation for the 2017 MTN Final, which was part of the city’s commitment and support for the final. “The City and the Cape Town Stadium team have always assisted the club wherever possible.” The Premier Soccer League said they were doing everything possible to assist Cape Town football teams during the drought and were also negotiating with the City of Cape Town regarding the upgrading of other venues McCarthy believes football in Cape Town is playing second fiddle to other sports, especially rugby. “The only way the severity of this treatment can be understood is, ironically, through the eyes of rugby. "Imagine the Stormers, with a chance to go top of the log, being told that they must play their next crucial home game against the Sharks in Durban. Season tickets sold, fans eagerly waiting and the players prepared to represent Cape Town. "It’s hard to imagine it because it will never happen.” The Saturday Star