Johannesburg - Would you marry a complete stranger? That s exactly what three couples will do in the new local reality-TV show, Married at First Sight South Africa. The show, which premiered on Lifetime (DStv 131) on Friday night, sees six young South Africans tie the knot to someone they meet for the very first time at the altar.Singles, who have failed to find love, put their hearts in the hands of a team of experts who select their perfect partner the couples then meet for the first time on the day of their wedding.After festivities and a honeymoon, the newly weds move in together and start their new lives. From the first kiss to the first tears and arguments, cameras document every moment.While this is the first season of the show here, it has aired in 23 different countries. The show fundis include relationship expert Paula Quinsee, counselling psychologist Neo Tshireletso Pule, sex health specialist Professor Shingai Mutambirwa, financial expert Winnie Kunene and radio and TV presenter Sam Cowen, a life expert.The Saturday Star had a quick chat to Sam about the show and what viewers can expect.What do you think of the concept of the show?&nbsp;When I first heard about it, I was cautious because we are talking about people s lives. But the more I researched, the more intrigued I became by the possibilities. Imagine you could find the perfect person for someone? How amazing to be part of something like that?If you were single, would you appear on the show?&nbsp;I wouldn t but that s because I m much older and pretty certain of myself. In my twenties, I might have considered it. I kissed a lot of frogs!What can viewers expect? Viewers can expect tears and laughter and love and pain and bickering and tenderness. And throughout all that is a high-level of authenticity.Are the contestants in good hands? I think the participants are in very good hands. Firstly, we don t view them as contestants. There s no car, overseas trip or money at the end. People enter the process looking for their happily-ever after. There s counselling during and after the process, for up to a year, whether the couples stay married or not.Saturday Star