Johannesburg Samsung customers are incredibly forgiving. They have let go of the Galaxy Note 7 explosions and trust the brand enough to know it will never happen again. This is according to Samsung director of marketing Justin Hume who explained their fourth quarter numbers increased last year, and so have those for their first quarter to date.At the Samsung 8th Annual Africa Forum held in Cape Town this week, Hume said their chief executive last month announced findings for the Note 7 explosions. The issue was isolated to the battery and its charging capability. When about 25 handsets were reported to have exploded globally, we recalled the entire multibillion dollars range of products. Since then, a far more robust quality check system has been implemented, said Hume.Meanwhile, earlier this month one of Samsung s factories caught fire after the exploding batteries that forced it to recall the Note 7 smartphone combusted, The Telegraph reported. The fire in the Samsung SDI factory in China, which developed some of the faulty batteries, was caused by a pile of discarded batteries in its waste facility, the local emergency services said.However, to Samsung s gratitude, said Hume, their customers loyalty remained an important factor for their sales not plummeting. Even when the mobile division was experiencing difficulty, other divisions helped bring the numbers up, he said. What we found is that our customers were incredibly forgiving. They let go of the Note 7 explosion ordeal and trusted us enough to know that it will never happen again. But we can say that had the Note 7 not exploded, our numbers would be even higher. Technology expert and managing director of World Wide Worx, Arthur Goldstuck, said people were willing to give Samsung a chance. The brand dominates in many areas of appliance and components that already make them formidable without the Smartphone division, said Goldstuck. Even in the smartphone division, we need to recognise the extent to which the Samsung Galaxy S6 and S7 phones leapfrogged everyone else, he said. They have been spectacularly successful phones, and technologically they have been ahead of the curve. Those phones have helped Samsung maintain a very strong position in the smartphone industry. Goldstuck explained that the Note 7 appealed to a certain segment of the market, Samsung may well have lost parts of that segment to Apple or Huawei. Some of the products Samsung launched at the summit included their new range of Sound bars and QLED TV sets. QLED TVs are capable of reproducing 100 percent colour volume. This breakthrough is a result of Samsung s switch to a new metal Quantum Dot material, making it possible for the TVs to express a significantly improved range of colour, said Lance Berger, business unit head for TV/AV at Samsung South Africa.They also introduced Wind-Free air conditioners that provide cooler indoor climate without direct airflow, a top mounted freezer refrigerator range and the Samsung s AddWash front-loader washing machines.All these products can be controlled remotely through smartphone apps.President and chief executiveof Samsung Africa, Yoo Young Kim, said the company is shifting to a new paradigm, where it would reinvent itself on the continent. To do this, I am holding out my hand to all of you, he told delegates at the forum. All you need to do is reach out and grab it. We will listen to what you say, to learn about what it means to be part of Africa. Saturday Star