MUSICAL heavyweight Lira says fans attending the Robin Thicke concert in Boksburg tomorrow, where she is the opening act, are in for a treat.
“I’m very excited about performing at the concert and I know it will be special because I take nothing for granted.” The platinum-selling songstress will take to the stage alongside DJ Kenzhero before Thicke’s much anticipated performance. The singer as well as the Kaya FM DJ are expected to set the tone for the American singer, songwriter and record producer. Lira is thrilled about meeting Thicke. “I really like his older, more soulful music and I’m excited about meeting him because you never know what such an occasion could yield.” The Feel Good hitmaker says she will jet off to Los Angeles soon where she is expected to meet potential songwriters and “explore the different mix of artists”. She is looking forward to performing in Ekurhuleni, because she grew up in Daveyton. Recently, a monument bearing her face was erected at the entrance to the township next to former ANC leader Oliver Tambo, former SACP leader Chris Hani as well as late fellow singer Lebo Mathosa who died in 2006. “The monument is one of the coolest things that has happened in my career and I’m so honoured to be celebrated among the greats. “It will also be amazing to perform in Ekurhuleni because it will attract a lot of attention from some of the people who I grew up with and some maybe haven’t even seen me perform live yet.” The afro-soul vocalist, who is one of the country's most celebrated exports, is proud of her achievements, including winning 11 SA Music Awards and releasing seven albums. She has worked hard to realise her dreams, she says. “My latest album was released globally and there are not many African artists who can claim that.” While Lira and DJ Kenzhero are expected to add a perfect fusion of soul, funk, jazz and African elements to the evening’s sound, Thicke is sure to serenade the crowd. The internationally acclaimed musician has collaborated with several artists, including Christina Aguilera, Nicki Minaj, Pharrell Williams and Usher. He is best known for his hits Blurred Lines, Lost Without You, Get Her Back, The Sweetest Love and Love After War. The concert will be held at the Birchwood Hotel and OR Tambo Conference Centre. Tickets are still available at Computicket and cost between R350 and R1250. @Karishma_Dipa The Saturday Star