With thousands of festival- goers braving the bitter cold and amid looming threats of water and power cuts, the 43rd edition of the National Arts Festival has hit the city of Grahamstown, and in a big way.
The festival, which lures arts lovers with the promise of “11 days of amazing”, is in its third day today, and the city is transformed as it always is at this time of the year. Bonginkosi Shangase, a playwright, and director from eThekwini, KwaZulu-Natal, regards the festival as the perfect networking opportunity. “This is my third time at the festival. "This is where artists and producers come together from all parts of the world, share ideas and market their art,” says Shangase. The festival boasts something for everyone. There is theatre in all its forms with drama, romance, comedy and musicals, and the best of music talent such as the Soil, Neo Muyanga and Judith Sephuma. Around festival time, business is good. The Eastern Cape Parks and Tourism Agency (ECPTA) says the festival is a vibrant contributor to the province’s tourism landscape. ECPTA chief marketing officer Nopasika Mxunyelwa says the festival contributes more than R90million to Grahamstown's GDP. “This colourful art and cultural event is a vibrant player in the tourism sector of the Eastern Cape. "In 2016, there were 700 productions, 2500 performers which attracted an audience of just over 240000. “The festival is a crown jewel of the Eastern Cape and has proven to be sustainable for 42 years. "Every year Grahams- town’s population doubles as people flock to the city and every hall or large room becomes a theatre. "Parks and sports fields become flea markets, quiet streets have to be managed by an army of temporary traffic wardens, and every available bed in the city is booked,” says Mxunyelwa. Local business people concur. Mark Crandon, who runs a local bakery, says: “It’s a lot more exciting to be open at this time. "There’s more people in town and this makes it more worthwhile, financially and the atmosphere (exciting),” says Crandon. #NAF17 officially is now officially in full swing. @sego_says The Saturday Star