AUBREY Meyer has a warning for Olympic champions Wayde Van Niekerk and Olympic champion Usain Bolt of Jamaica.
“With my new legs their records will be in danger,” he said confidently. The young amputee from Atlantis, outside Cape Town, who shot to fame after Independent Media highlighted his plight last month, is back on track to realising his dream of becoming an Olympic athlete. Until a week ago, his worse-for-wear wooden leg prevented him from participating in sporting events. Today, he has a state-of-the-art running and walking blade, courtesy of the NPO, the Jumping Kids fund. Aubrey returned home to Cape Town this week after spending a week in Pretoria where his new limbs were created, fitted and tested. The Parkview Primary pupil’s first order of business was treating the residents of Rotterdam Street in Wesfleur, where he lives, to a running performance with his new running blade. Meyer’s back-story is every bit as heartbreaking as it is inspiring. He had his left leg amputated below the knee after he was born as a result of his mother being misdiagnosed with cancer while pregnant with him. The medication she received to treat the cancer effectively resulted in her foetus's leg not developing completely while in the womb. Doctors decided to amputate below the knee at birth. But the youngster has never let his disability hold him back from enjoying his childhood. Earlier this year, athletics coach Tashwell Adams saw him in action at a nearby running track. Adams noticed that the wear and tear on Meyer’s artificial limb was hampering his progress. Believing that he had a future record-breaking athlete on his hands, Adams sprung into action to get the youngster a new prosthetic. He approached the Jumping Kids organisation for assistance, and the rest of that story is now a heart-warming history. Adams accompanied Meyer to Pretoria last week. It was also his first time on an plane. “It was tiring because I needed to carry Aubrey everywhere we went, but it was exciting,” said Adams. “We did not have crutches or a wheelchair and his leg was sore because of the old prosthetic. “After the week of measurements and tests it was a relief not to carry him around any more. “With his new blade, Aubrey was kicking the soccer ball pretty well. This laaitie (kid) has real skill.” His artificial limb for daily use is blue. “It is the colours of Western Province and I want to play rugby for them one day. I also want to run for them.” Aubrey’s running blade is a Spider-Man-inspired design. “Spider-Man is my favourite superhero. I want to climb walls like him,” Aubrey said. He also wants to play football: “Now I have new legs I am going to do everything I want to do.” @RobinAdamsZA The Saturday Star