Various organisations have expressed shock at the death of senior SABC journalist Suna Venter, who was found dead in her Fairland home on Thursday morning.
Together with another seven journalists, Venter had formed part of a group that came to be known as the SABC 8 after they were suspended from the public broadcaster after voicing their concerns about editorial interference in the newsrooms. The eight journalists were fired but seven of them were later reinstated after also objecting to former chief operating officer Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s policy on not airing footage from violent protests. The South African National Editors’ Forum (Sanef) expressed its “deep shock” yesterday at the untimely death of Venter, saying she would always be remembered for never giving up, even when she faced threats and intimidation. In a statement on Thursday, her family said the 32-year-old was recently diagnosed with a cardiac condition known as stress cardiomyopathy, or “broken heart syndrome," believed to be caused by trauma and periods of unnatural stress. “Over the course of the past year, she received various threatening SMS messages. Her flat was broken into on numerous occasions, the brake cables of her car were cut and her car’s tyres slashed. "She was shot at and abducted - tied to a tree at Melville Koppies, while the grass around her was set alight,” her family said in a statement. “On a separate occasion earlier this year, she was shot in the face with an unknown weapon and received surgery to remove the metal pellets from her face. During the past year, she was assaulted on three occasions. Those closest to her believe that her condition was exacerbated, if not caused, by the events of the past year.“ The South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) also mourned her death, describing her as “one of the brave SABC 8 journalists who fought to defend free speech and stop censorship in our public broadcaster”. Saftu said there could be no doubt that the attacks on Venter were connected to the SABC’s brutal campaign against her and all the other SABC staff who fought for a free, democratic and independent public broadcaster. “Saftu hails her as a martyr for the cause of freedom of expression and for a media which is a forum for all South Africans to freely express their views.” The South African National Civic Organisation (Sanco) had earlier yesterday described the death of Venter as a “monumental loss”. The SACP, meanwhile, cautioned against campaigns of intimidation which Venter, and also SACP second deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila, had been subjected to. "Suna was also subject to a sustained campaign of intimidation, sabotage and abuse," the party said. - ANA The Saturday Star